---
layout: page
title: Chapter 2: Scoping and Structuring Your Work: Data, Metadata, and Project Management
---


2.1 Readings

[Appleford, Simon, and Jennifer Guiliano. “Designing Your First
Project.” DevDH.org, 2013.](http://devdh.org/lectures/design/)

Baca, Murtha. “Scholars’ Workspace: Developing Tools, Methods, and
Standards for Teaching, Conducting, and Publishing Humanities Research
in Digital Form.” presented at the Digital Art History Summer Institute,
UCLA, July 2014.

[Baca, Murtha, and Getty Research Institute. *Introduction to Metadata*.
Los Angeles, CA: Getty Research Institute, 2008.
](http://www.getty.edu/research/publications/electronic_publications/intrometadata/index.html)

Christie, Michael. “Computer Databases and Aboriginal Knowledge.”
*International Journal of Learning in Social Contexts* 1 (2004): 4–12.

[Harpring, Patricia. *Introduction to Controlled Vocabularies:
Terminology for Art, Architecture, and Other Cultural Works*. Los
Angeles, Calif.: Getty Research Institute,
2010.](http://www.getty.edu/research/publications/electronic_publications/intro_controlled_vocab/index.html)

[Kramer, Michael. “What Does Digital Humanities Bring to the Table?”
Issues in Digital History, 2012.
](http://www.michaeljkramer.net/cr/what-does-digital-humanities-bring-to-the-table/)

Lewis, James P. Checklist for managing projects adapted from Project
planning, scheduling & control: a hands-on guide to bringing projects in
on time and on budget (Chicago: Probus Publishing Company, 1991).

[Ramsay, Stephen. “Databases,” in Companion to Digital Humanities
(Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture), ed. Susan Schreibman,
Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth, Hardcover, Blackwell Companions to
Literature and Culture (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Professional,
2004).](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/)

Rosenberg. “Data before the Fact.” In *Raw Data Is an Oxymoron*, edited
by Lisa Gitelman, 15–40. MIT Press, 2013.

[Sperberg-McQueen, C.M. “Classification and Its Structures.” In
*Companion to Digital Humanities (Blackwell Companions to Literature and
Culture)*, edited by Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth,
Hardcover. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Professional, 2004.
](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/)

[Wallack, Jessica Seddon, and Ramesh Srinivasan. “Local-Global:
Reconciling Mismatched Ontologies in Development Information Systems.”
In *System Sciences, 2009. HICSS’09*. *42nd Hawaii International
Conference on*, 1–10,
2009.](http://rameshsrinivasan.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/18-WallackSrinivasanHICSS.pdf)

2.2 Resources

[“Introduction to
Data-Cleaning”](http://schoolofdata.org/courses/#IntroDataCleaning): The
School of Data offers a helpful overview on data-cleaning in general.

[Library of Congress Subject
Headings](http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects.html): An authority on
providing subject access to collections using standards.

[Getty Vocabularies](http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/):
The Getty vocabularies contain structured terminology for art history.
Compliant with international standards, they provide authoritative
information for catalogers, researchers, and data providers.

[Porter, Vicki, and Robin Thornes. 1994. *A guide to the description of
architectural drawings*. New York: G.K.
Hall.](http://www.getty.edu/research/publications/electronic_publications/fda/index.html):
Guidelines, conventions, and standards for describing architectural
drawings and documents, with examples and recommendations for authority
files and controlled vocabularies.

[Baca, Murtha. 2002. *Introduction to art image access: issues, tools,
standards, strategies*. Los Angeles: Getty Research
Institute](http://www.getty.edu/research/publications/electronic_publications/intro_aia/index.html).:
An online publication that addresses the issues that underlie the
intellectual process of documenting a visual collection to make it
accessible in an electronic environment.

[Baca, Murtha, and Patricia Harpring. 2006. *Categories for the
description of works of art*. Los Angeles: Getty Research
Institute.](http://www.getty.edu/research/publications/electronic_publications/cdwa/index.html):
A set of guidelines for the description of art, architecture, and other
cultural works.

[Besser, Howard, and Jennifer Trant. 1995. *Introduction to imaging:
issues in constructing an image database*. Santa Monica, Calif: Getty
Art History Information
Program.](http://www.getty.edu/research/publications/electronic_publications/introimages/index.html):
An online publication that introduces the technology of digital imaging
and creating an image library.

[Omeka’s About Page](http://omeka.org/about/): Think that you may want
to use Omeka? Check out the About page and see how museum professionals,
archivists, and educators are using Omeka.

[Art Historical
Data](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/DAH_ImageData_2015.ppt):
A presentation by Johanna Drucker on what is considered art historical
data.

[Content Management
Systems](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/CMSs.pdf):
A presentation by Wendy Kurtz on content management systems basics.

[Work Plan and Workflow Development
Guidelines](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/FOR-DAH.doc):
A presentation by Johanna Drucker regarding the steps needed to assemble
and run a digital art history project.

[DH Project Management: The Very, Very
Basics](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Project-Management-for-Getty-Institute.pdf):
A presentation by Miriam Posner on essentail project management basics.

[Villanova University Project Planning
Lecture](http://www.villanovau.com/resources/sample-lectures/project-management/#.V6UGw5OANHw):
A lecture by Wayne Brantley on the importance of project planning.

[Digital Methods in Art
History](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Digital-Methods-for-Art-Historyx.doc):
A list of digital art historical methods developed by Johanna Drucker

2.3 Tutorials

*For Data*

[“Using a spreadsheet to clean up a
dataset”](http://schoolofdata.org/handbook/recipes/cleaning-data-with-spreadsheets/):
Clean up data using Excel.

[“Introduction to
OpenRefine”](http://www.meanboyfriend.com/overdue_ideas/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Introduction-to-OpenRefine-handout-CC-BY.pdf):
Developed by Owen Stephens on behalf of the British Library, this is a
great walkthrough to get you started with the program.

[“Cleaning Data with
OpenRefine”](http://programminghistorian.org/lessons/cleaning-data-with-openrefine):
A shorthand introduction to the tool and what it can do for cleaning
data by Seth van Hooland, Ruben Verborgh and Max De Wilde

[Verborgh, Ruben, and Max De Wilde. *Using OpenRefine: The Essential
OpenRefine Guide That Takes You From Data Analysis and Error Fixing to
Linking Your Dataset to the Web*. Birmingham, UK: Packt Publishing,
2013.](http://ucelinks.cdlib.org:8888/sfx_local?sid=UCLA:CAT&genre=book&__char_set=utf8&isbn=9781783289097)**:**
The book is styled on a Cookbook, containing recipes - combined with
free datasets - which will turn readers into proficient OpenRefine users
in the fastest possible way. (To get to the book, click on “EBSCO
eBooks.”)

“Cleaning Up Your Excel 2013 Data”: I like OpenRefine, but if you
prefer, you can use Excel to do some data-cleaning. Lynda offers several
video tutorials on using Excel to clean data. Search for “Cleaning Up
Your Excel 2013 Data.”

[Automate the Boring Stuff with
Python](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/): Interested in programming?
This online resource is written for office workers, students,
administrators, and anyone who uses a computer to learn how to code
small, practical programs to automate tasks on their computer.

[“Cleaning OCR’d Text with Regular
Expressions.”](http://programminghistorian.org/lessons/cleaning-ocrd-text-with-regular-expressions):
For those at the intermediate level, this tutorial walks you through how
to take an OCR’d document and use Regular Expressions to make it easily
viewed in Excel and prepped for geocoding.

[Designing Databases for Historical Research, by Mark
Merry](http://www.history.ac.uk/research-training/courses/designing-databases):
Read this before you try to design a database for your research. The
registration process is very weird and annoying, but it’s worth it; this
is an excellent primer for the beginner.

*For Content Management Systems*

[Creating a blog post in
WordPress](http://miriamposner.com/dh101f15/index.php/creating-a-blog-post-on-our-course-site/):
After you have set up your blog site, this tutorial will walk you
through how to make your first post.

[Omeka Vocabulary
Worksheet](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/OmekaVocabWorksheet.pdf):
A glossary of terms to introduce you to the way Omeka works.

[Up and Running with Omeka
Tutorial](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Up-and-Running-with-Omeka.pdf):
Once Omeka has been installed, this guide will walk you through how to
populate and build your site.

[Building an Omeka Exhibit
Tutorial](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Omeka_Exhibit_Handout.pdf):
This tutorial specifically addresses how to create an exhibit in Omeka

[Installing Omeka Themes](http://omeka.org/codex/Managing_Themes_2.0):
Want a different look to your site? Omeka offers documentation on how to
change the theme of your site to give you more options that the ones
built into the out-of-the-box content management system.

[Installing Omeka
Plugins](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gN4NYMEfDI3cvVZMCNgOViTwX2FTND93V1CNZPNuqPw/edit):
Want additional functionality in your Omeka site? This resource
demonstrates how to install plugins which can help you add functionality
to your site. You can find a list of available plugins on the [Omeka
site](http://omeka.org/add-ons/plugins/).

[Preparing for CSV
Import](https://omeka.org/codex/Plugins/CSV_Import_2.0): Have organized
data you want to import? Omeka has instructions on how to import a CSV
file.

[Managing Item Types in
Omeka](https://omeka.org/codex/Managing_Item_Types_2.0): Are your
objects unique? Item types in Omeka are user-defined type of object,
with associated metadata. While Omeka comes with predefined item types
with fields, you can easily edit these types, or add your own types.
This resource shows you how.

[Omeka’s Documentation Page](https://omeka.org/codex/Documentation): For
additional troubleshooting, Omeka offers a very thorough set of
documentation.

*For Project Management*

[*Making Things Happen*, by Scott
Berkun](http://www.amazon.com/Making-Things-Happen-Mastering-Management/dp/0596517718):
There is a lot of terrible writing on project management, and Berkun’s
book is one of the few I like. It’s designed for business professionals,
but its principles are generally applicable, and the book doesn’t insult
your intelligence.

[“Issues in Large Project Management,” by Lynne
Siemens](http://dhsi.org/content/2012Curriculum/12.ProjectPlanning.pdf)
(warning: giant PDF): Siemens’s class is legendary among DHers, and many
of us are alumni of the summer course she teaches at the Digital
Humanities Summer Institute. The course packet contains a wealth of
useful information, including sample project documentation.

[Tito Sierra’s presentations on project
management](http://www.slideshare.net/tsierra): Sierra, a director of
product management at EBSCO, has a terrific collection of presentations
on project management. They’re simple, to-the-point, and immensely
useful. See in particular [Project Management
Basics](http://www.slideshare.net/tsierra/project-management-basics) and
[The Project
One-Pager](http://www.slideshare.net/tsierra/the-projectonepager).

[DevDH: Developing Digital Humanities Projects](http://devdh.org/): This
site, the work of two experienced DH project managers, contains an
abundance of very useful lectures and presentations specific to DH
project development.

[Workflow for Planning a Digital Project, by Johanna
Drucker](http://program.dh.ucla.edu/getty-2014/wp-content/uploads/Johannas-Workflow-for-Digital-Projects.pdf):
Just starting a digital project for the first time? This resource will
help you plan appropriately.

2.4 Tools

*Data*

Excel: The most reliable tool for creating a spreadsheet for your data.

[Google Sheets](https://www.google.com/sheets/about/): An online
platform for organizing and storing your data in a spreadsheet.

[OpenRefine](http://openrefine.org/): For cleaning up spreadsheets and
is free to download.

*Content Management Systems for Smaller Projects*

[WordPress](https://wordpress.com/): Great for making a quick website or
blog.

[Scalar](http://scalar.usc.edu/): Scalar is a free, [open
source](http://github.com/anvc/scalar) authoring and publishing platform
that’s designed to make it easy for authors to write long-form,
born-digital scholarship online.

[The Getty Scholars’
Workspace](http://www.getty.edu/research/scholars/digital_art_history/getty_scholars_workspace/index.html):
An online environment designed to support collaboration with a toolset
specifically designed for art historical research.

*Project Management*

Add to what you are already doing: [Google
Tasks](https://support.google.com/mail/answer/106237?hl=en) to organize
and  [Doodle](http://doodle.com/) for scheduling

For Meetings: [Go to
Meeting,](https://www.gotomeeting.com/conferencing/g2msem3?c_name=gget-d-c&c_mark=NAPPC&c_kwd=go_to_meeting-Exact&c_prod=GTM&c_cmp=sf-70150000000adcs&c_date=CATnumber&c_cell=CjwKEAjwiZitBRCy0pb3rIbG9XwSJACmuvvzGYBJFVuqAr2W9yutmqkO0dWJjXM-JoTY2KT9sY-uSRoCprzw_wcB&gclid=CjwKEAjwiZitBRCy0pb3rIbG9XwSJACmuvvzGYBJFVuqAr2W9yutmqkO0dWJjXM-JoTY2KT9sY-uSRoCprzw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds)
[Fuze](https://www.fuze.com/landing?utm_source=SEM-Google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=Search-Brand-US&network=Search&ag=Search-Brand-US-fusemeetings&region=US&gclid=CjwKEAjwiZitBRCy0pb3rIbG9XwSJACmuvvzj-AWcZtLZMd5lwEBx_jlqj9CREDV0jxl53LQ69myCRoCfBbw_wcB),
[WebEx](https://signup.webex.com/webexmeetings/US/sem_acquisition.html?CPM=KNC-sem&TrackID=1031986&country=US&psearchID=webex&channel=sem)

For collaborative organization: [Basecamp,](https://basecamp.com/)
[Trello,](https://trello.com/)
[Confluence](https://www.atlassian.com/software/confluence)

For Issue Tracking: [JIRA](https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira)

*Image Annotation*

[ThingLink](https://www.thinglink.com/): This is a fun tool for linking
different parts of images to videos, images, webpages, or whatever you
want. It’s easy to use and especially nice for teaching.
[Example](https://www.thinglink.com/scene/500859588443111424).

[Neatline](http://neatline.org/): Designed for mapping, Neatline
(described above) can also handle image annotation.
[Example](http://bikinghistory.com/neatline/show/bf-goodrich-studio-components).

[Gigapixel](http://storymap.knightlab.com/gigapixel.html): Much like its
sister platform, StoryMaps, GigaPixel makes it easy to take a
step-by-step tour of image annotations.
[Example](http://cdn.knightlab.com/libs/storymapjs/latest/embed/?url=https://www.googledrive.com/host/0B1d8oNIpMx53Wk9CdDlVZ01qU1E/published.json).

[Prezi](http://prezi.com/): Some people hate Prezi (I’ve heard people
say it gives them vertigo), but used responsibly, Prezi can be a useful,
fun tool for presentations. If PowerPoint is a film strip, Prezi is a
blank canvas. Rather than moving from slide to slide, you can hop around
a canvas, zooming in or panning out as the mood strikes. And you can
embed Prezis anywhere, making them quite useful for sharing information.
[Example](http://prezi.com/piwbxuqaih4f/world-cup-2014-must-watch-players-uk/).

*Exhibit Platforms*

*If you have a collection of sources, you might want a way to show them
off. Here are a couple of platforms designed specifically for organizing
collections and arranging them into stories.*

[Omeka](http://omeka.org/): You can use Omeka to create collections and
exhibits of [stamps](http://blacksonstamp.omeka.net/), [artifacts
related to a historical
event](http://scarc.library.oregonstate.edu/omeka/exhibits/show/atomic),
or [artists’
books](http://marbl-omeka.library.emory.edu/marbl/exhibits/show/artistsbooksshowcase).
The real strength of Omeka is its metadata (the information you enter
about each item in your exhibit). It uses a standard called Dublin Core
that makes collections compatible with one other. It has a lot of cool
plugins so that you can do things like allow people to [contribute items
to your archive](http://omeka.org/codex/Plugins/Contribution). You
should be aware that there are two “kinds” of Omeka:
[omeka.org](http://omeka.org/), which you install on your own server;
and [omeka.net](http://www.omeka.net/), which is hosted for you. Some
people like the former because you can customize it more heavily, but
omeka.net is perfectly fine for getting started.

[Google Open Gallery](http://www.google.com/opengallery): This is a very
new platform, so details are scarce, but it’s an exhibit platform that
appears to have some nice visual features, good search and filtering
capabilities, and a low learning curve. You have to request a login,
which takes about a week.
[Example](http://belgian-comic-strip-center.culturalspot.org/home).

2.5 Projects

1\. [Getty Provenance
Index](http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/provenance/)

2\. [Digging into Image Data to answer Authorship-Related Questions, Dean
Rehberger et. al.](http://isda.ncsa.illinois.edu/DID/)

3\. [Digital Sculpture
Project](http://www.digitalsculpture.org/index.html)

4\. [Digital
Harlem](http://heur-db-pro-1.ucc.usyd.edu.au/HEURIST/harlem/)

5\. [Kindred Britain](http://kindred.stanford.edu/)

6\. [Raphael Project](http://cima.ng-london.org.uk/documentation/)

7\. [Renoir Paintings and Drawings
](http://publications.artic.edu/reader/renoir-paintings-and-drawings-art-institute-chicago)

8\. [Rossetti Archive](http://www.rossettiarchive.org/)

9\. [Accademia di San
Luca](http://www.nga.gov/casva/accademia/intro.shtm)

10.
[Smarthistory](http://smarthistory.khanacademy.org/about-smarthistory.html)

11\. [Van Gogh Letters](http://www.vangoghletters.org/vg/)

12\. [RomeLab](http://romelab.etc.ucla.edu/)

13\. [Renaissance Melancholy](http://melancholystories.com/)

14\. [Artl@s](http://www.artlas.ens.fr/about/?lang=en)

15.
[JanBrueghel.net](http://digitalhumanities.berkeley.edu/blog/14/04/27/project-spotlight-janbrueghelnet-now-online)

16\. [Mukurtu](http://www.mukurtu.org/)

17\. [The Real Face of White
Australia](http://invisibleaustralians.org/faces/)

18\. Baca, Murtha, et al., *Pietro Mellini's Inventory in Verse, 1681: A
Digital Facsimile with Translation and Commentary*, (Los Angeles: Getty
Research Institute, 2015), <http://hdl.handle.net/10020/mellini>

19\. Delphine Burlot, Martine Denoyelle (dir.). *Élie-Honoré Montagny's
Recueil d'Antiquités, A Digital Critical Edition*. Paris : Institut
national d'histoire de l'art. Disponible sur
[http://digitalmontagny.inha.fr/](http://digitalmontagny.inha.fr/en)
(Consulté le jj/mm/aaaa).
